## Summary from Chapter 1:
* The scientific method is an efficient form of troubleshooting.
* The journalctl command outputs system logs generated by systemd services and other
units.
* The sos report command gathers detailed system information into a tarball.
* The redhat-support-tool command interfaces with Red Hat support services.
* The Red Hat Customer Portal provides tools to diagnose and troubleshoot issues.
* The Red Hat Insights service provides system analytic and remediation strategies.

## Summary from Chapter 2:
* The web console provides system monitoring, administration, and session recording through a
GUI.
* The rsyslog service enables centralized local and remote logging.
* The Red Hat Ansible Automation Platform improves the efficiency and stability of system
deployments and configuration changes.
* The aide utility tracks file and directory attributes to facilitate detecting unauthorized changes.
* The auditctl command manages rules to select which security events are collected in the
audit log.
* The ausearch command queries the audit log and displays messages in readable form.
  
## Summary from Chapter 3:
• The RHEL 8 & 9 boot process flow and the purpose of the GRUB2 bootloader.
• The `grubby` command manipulates bootloader configuration files.
• The `efibootmgr` command manages the boot order and boot targets on UEFI systems.
• The `systemctl list-dependencies` and `systemd-analyze` commands show a systemd
unit's dependencies.
• The `debug-shell` service grants early root access to a system as it boots.
• The root user's password is reset by adding `rd.break` or `rw init=/bin/bash` to the kernel options at boot.
